Add documentation for Faiss encoder SQfp16 (#6249)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/knn/knn-index.md

To create a k-NN index, set the `settings.index.knn` parameter to `true`:

```json
PUT /test-index
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "knn": true
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector1": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 3,
        "method": {
          "name": "hnsw",
          "space_type": "l2",
          "engine": "lucene",
          "parameters": {
            "ef_construction": 128,
            "m": 24
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Lucene byte vector

Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.9, you can use `byte` vectors with the `lucene` engine in order to reduce the amount of storage space needed. For more information, see [Lucene byte vector]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector#lucene-byte-vector).

## SIMD optimization for the Faiss engine

> Starting with version 2.13, the k-NN plugin supports [Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_data) processing if the underlying hardware supports SIMD instructions (AVX2 on x64 architecture and Neon on ARM64 architecture). SIMD is supported by default on Linux machines only for the Faiss engine. SIMD architecture helps boost the overall performance, improving indexing throughput at indexing time and reducing latency at search time.

Author: ```suggestion
Starting with version 2.13, the k-NN plugin supports [Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_data) processing if the underlying hardware supports SIMD instructions (AVX2 on x64 architecture and Neon on ARM64 architecture). SIMD is supported by default on Linux machines only for the Faiss engine. SIMD architecture helps boost the overall performance by improving indexing throughput and reducing search latency.
```

<!-- vale off -->
### x64 architecture
<!-- vale on -->

For the x64 architecture, two different versions of the Faiss library are built and shipped with the artifact:

> - `libopensearchknn_faiss.so`: The default Faiss library. 

Author: `default` might not be an apt. word to use here. Shall we mention it as non-optimized Faiss library without SIMD instructions because may be after a couple of releases or from the next major release we might even stop supporting non avx2 version of library?

To create a k-NN index, set the `settings.index.knn` parameter to `true`:

```json
PUT /test-index
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "knn": true
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "my_vector1": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 3,
        "method": {
          "name": "hnsw",
          "space_type": "l2",
          "engine": "lucene",
          "parameters": {
            "ef_construction": 128,
            "m": 24
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Lucene byte vector

Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.9, you can use `byte` vectors with the `lucene` engine in order to reduce the amount of storage space needed. For more information, see [Lucene byte vector]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector#lucene-byte-vector).

## SIMD optimization for the Faiss engine

> Starting with version 2.13, the k-NN plugin supports [Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_data) processing if the underlying hardware supports SIMD instructions (AVX2 on x64 architecture and Neon on ARM64 architecture). SIMD is supported by default on Linux machines only for the Faiss engine. SIMD architecture helps boost the overall performance by improving indexing throughput and reducing search latency.

Reviewer: > SIMD is supported by default on Linux machines only for the Faiss engine.

SIMD should be CPU architecture dependent right? Why do we say only Linux machine?

Author: Yes, SIMD is CPU architecture dependent. But, right now we are running into some issues on Windows OS due to some limitations with compiler and supporting SIMD for linux OS and mac OS (for development only). So, that's the reason we are explicitly calling it out that it works on linux.

> Starting with version 2.13, the k-NN plugin supports [Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_data) processing if the underlying hardware supports SIMD instructions (AVX2 on x64 architecture and Neon on ARM64 architecture). SIMD is supported by default on Linux machines only for the Faiss engine. SIMD architecture helps boost the overall performance by improving indexing throughput and reducing search latency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with version 2.13, the k-NN plugin supports [Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_data) processing if the underlying hardware supports SIMD instructions (AVX2 on x64 architecture and Neon on ARM64 architecture). SIMD is supported by default on Linux machines only for the Faiss engine. SIMD architecture helps boost overall performance by improving indexing throughput and reducing search latency.
```

Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.9, you can use `byte` vectors with the `lucene` engine in order to reduce the amount of storage space needed. For more information, see [Lucene byte vector]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector#lucene-byte-vector).

## SIMD optimization for Faiss

Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.13, [SIMD(Single instruction, multiple data)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_data) is supported by default on Linux machines only for Faiss engine if the underlying processor on the system supports SIMD instructions (`AVX2` on `x64` architecture and `NEON` on `ARM64` architecture) which helps to boost the overall performance. 

> For x64 architecture, two different versions of Faiss library(`libopensearchknn_faiss.so` and `libopensearchknn_faiss_avx2.so`) are built and shipped with the artifact where the library with `_avx2` suffix has the AVX2 SIMD instructions. During runtime, detects if the underlying system supports AVX2 or not and loads the corresponding library.

Reviewer 3: ``At runtime, k-NN plugin checks if `AVX2` is supported and loads the appropriate library.``

> Users can override and disable AVX2 and load the default Faiss library(`libopensearchknn_faiss.so`) even if system supports avx2 by setting `knn.faiss.avx2.disabled`(Static) to `true` in opensearch.yml (which is by default `false`).

Reviewer 3: ``For `x64` architecture, users can override and disable `AVX2` performance boost and load the default Faiss library(`libopensearchknn_faiss.so`) even if their system hardware supports `AVX2` by setting `knn.faiss.avx2.disabled`(Static) to `true` in opensearch.yml (defaults to `false`).``

> You can override or disable AVX2 and load the default Faiss library (`libopensearchknn_faiss.so`) even if your hardware supports AVX2 by specifying the `knn.faiss.avx2.disabled` static setting as `true` in opensearch.yml (the default is `false`).

Reviewer 4: Changed to code font. File is understood because of the .yml extension.

{: .note}

> For arm64 architecture, only one Faiss library(`libopensearchknn_faiss.so`) is built and shipped which contains the NEON SIMD instructions and unlike avx2, it can't be disabled. 

Reviewer 3: For arm64 architecture, only one Faiss library(`libopensearchknn_faiss.so`) is built and shipped which contains the performance boost utillizing `NEON` SIMD instructions . Unlike `AVX2`, it can't be disabled.

### Supported faiss encoders

You can use encoders to reduce the memory footprint of a k-NN index at the expense of search accuracy. faiss has

> several encoder types, but the plugin currently only supports *flat*, *pq* and *SQfp16* encoding.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
several encoder types, but the plugin currently only supports *flat*, *pq*, and *SQfp16* encoding.
```

Author: Updated

Reviewer 5: @naveentatikonda we arent going with SQfp16 as the name right?

:--- | :--- | :---
`flat` | false | Encode vectors as floating point arrays. This encoding does not reduce memory footprint.
`pq` | true | An abbreviation for _product quantization_, it is a lossy compression technique that uses clustering to encode a vector into a fixed size of bytes, with the goal of minimizing the drop in k-NN search accuracy. At a high level, vectors are broken up into `m` subvectors, and then each subvector is represented by a `code_size` code obtained from a code book produced during training. For more information about product quantization, see [this blog post](https://medium.com/dotstar/understanding-faiss-part-2-79d90b1e5388).

> `SQfp16` | false | Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.12, SQfp16 encoder can be used to quantize 32 bit floating point vectors into 16 bit floats using the Faiss inbuilt ScalarQuantizer in order to reduce the memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision. Besides memory optimization, the overall performance has been improved with the SIMD optimization (using `AVX2` on `x86` architecture and using `NEON` on `ARM` architecture). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`SQfp16` | false | Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.12, you can use the SQfp16 encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats using the Faiss built-in ScalarQuantizer in order to reduce the memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision. Besides optimizing memory use, SQfp16 improves the overall performance with the SIMD optimization (using `AVX2` on `x86` architecture and using `NEON` on `ARM` architecture). 
```

Author: Updated

> `SQfp16` | false | Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.12, you can use the SQfp16 encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats using the Faiss built-in ScalarQuantizer in order to reduce the memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision. Besides optimizing memory use, SQfp16 improves the overall performance with the SIMD optimization (using `AVX2` on `x86` architecture and using `NEON` on `ARM` architecture).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SQfp16` | false | Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.12, you can use the SQfp16 encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats by using the built-in Faiss ScalarQuantizer in order to reduce the memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision. Besides optimizing memory use, SQfp16 improves the overall performance with the SIMD optimization (using `AVX2` on `x86` architecture and using `NEON` on `ARM` architecture).
```

> `SQfp16` | false | Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.12, you can use the SQfp16 encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats using the Faiss built-in ScalarQuantizer in order to reduce the memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision. Besides optimizing memory use, SQfp16 improves the overall performance with the SIMD optimization (using `AVX2` on `x86` architecture and using `NEON` on `ARM` architecture).

Reviewer 2: Last sentence: "performance of the SIMD optimization"? Should we define SIMD?

> For `SQfp16` encoder, the SIMD optimization is supported only on Linux and Mac OS. But, the encoder can be still used on Windows OS with a reduced performance (but with same memory optimization). In order to enable the SIMD support, the vector dimension must be a multiple of **8**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For `SQfp16` encoder, the SIMD optimization is supported only on Linux and Mac OS. However, you can still use the encoder on Windows OS with a reduced performance (but with same memory optimization). In order to enable the SIMD support, the vector dimension must be a multiple of **8**.
```

Author: Updated

> For `SQfp16` encoder, the SIMD optimization is supported only on Linux and Mac OS. However, you can still use the encoder on Windows OS with a reduced performance (but with same memory optimization). In order to enable the SIMD support, the vector dimension must be a multiple of **8**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the `SQfp16` encoder, the SIMD optimization is supported only on Linux and macOS. However, you can still use the encoder on Windows with reduced performance but the same memory optimization. In order to enable SIMD support, the vector dimension must be a multiple of **8**.
```

{: .note}

```json
"method": {
    "name":"hnsw",
    "engine":"lucene",
    "space_type": "l2",
    "parameters":{
        "m":2048,
        "ef_construction": 245
    }
}
```

### Supported Faiss encoders

You can use encoders to reduce the memory footprint of a k-NN index at the expense of search accuracy. Faiss has

> several encoder types, but the plugin currently only supports `flat`, `pq`, and `sq` encoding.

Reviewer: <s> Faiss has
several encoder types, but the plugin currently only supports `flat`, `pq`, and `sq` encoding </s>

k-NN plugin currently supports  `flat`, `pq`, and `sq` encoders from Faiss library?.

Author: ack

> `flat`, `pq`, and `sq` encoders implemented in the Faiss library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`flat`, `pq`, and `sq` encoders in the Faiss library.
```

}
```

### Supported Faiss encoders

You can use encoders to reduce the memory footprint of a k-NN index at the expense of search accuracy. Faiss has
several encoder types, but the plugin currently only supports `flat`, `pq`, and `sq` encoding.

The following example method definition specifies the `hnsw` method and a `pq` encoder:

```json

> {

Author: Please revert this change because here we are just trying to show an example of method definition. We don't need to add vector type and dimension

Reviewer 4: Reverted all requests to show only the method.

Encoder name | Requires training | Description
:--- | :--- | :---

> `flat` (Default) | false | Encode vectors as floating point arrays. This encoding does not reduce memory footprint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`flat` (Default) | false | Encode vectors as floating-point arrays. This encoding does not reduce memory footprint.
```

`pq` | true | An abbreviation for _product quantization_, it is a lossy compression technique that uses clustering to encode a vector into a fixed size of bytes, with the goal of minimizing the drop in k-NN search accuracy. At a high level, vectors are broken up into `m` subvectors, and then each subvector is represented by a `code_size` code obtained from a code book produced during training. For more information about product quantization, see [this blog post](https://medium.com/dotstar/understanding-faiss-part-2-79d90b1e5388).

> `sq` | false | Stands for _scalar quantization_. Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.13, you can use the `sq` encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats. In version 2.13, the built-in `sq` encoder is the SQFP16 Faiss encoder. The encoder reduces memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision and improves performance by using SIMD optimization (using AVX2 on x86 architecture or Neon on ARM architecture). For more information, see [Faiss scalar quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization#faiss-scalar-quantization).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`sq` | false | An abbreviation for _scalar quantization_. Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.13, you can use the `sq` encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats. In version 2.13, the built-in `sq` encoder is the SQFP16 Faiss encoder. The encoder reduces memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision and improves performance by using SIMD optimization (using AVX2 on x86 architecture or Neon on ARM architecture). For more information, see [Faiss scalar quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization#faiss-scalar-quantization).
```

> `sq` | false | Stands for _scalar quantization_. Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.13, you can use the `sq` encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats. In version 2.13, the built-in `sq` encoder is the SQFP16 Faiss encoder. The encoder reduces memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision and improves performance by using SIMD optimization (using AVX2 on x86 architecture or Neon on ARM architecture). For more information, see [Faiss scalar quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization#faiss-scalar-quantization).

Reviewer 2: Should ARM be ARM64?

Reviewer 4: @naveentatikonda Can you advise?

Author: Yes, let us change it to ARM64

> `sq` | false | An abbreviation for _scalar quantization_. Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.13, you can use the `sq` encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats. In version 2.13, the built-in `sq` encoder is the SQFP16 Faiss encoder. The encoder reduces memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision and improves performance by using SIMD optimization (using AVX2 on x86 architecture or Neon on ARM architecture). For more information, see [Faiss scalar quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization#faiss-scalar-quantization).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`sq` | false | An abbreviation for _scalar quantization_. Starting with k-NN plugin version 2.13, you can use the `sq` encoder to quantize 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floats. In version 2.13, the built-in `sq` encoder is the SQFP16 Faiss encoder. The encoder reduces memory footprint with a minimal loss of precision and improves performance by using SIMD optimization (using AVX2 on x86 architecture or Neon on ARM64 architecture). For more information, see [Faiss scalar quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization#faiss-scalar-quantization).
```

#### PQ parameters

Parameter name | Required | Default | Updatable | Description
:--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :---

> `m` | false | 1 | false |  Determines the number of subvectors into which to break the vector. Subvectors are encoded independently of each other. This dimension of the vector must be divisible by `m`. Maximum value is 1,024.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`m` | false | 1 | false |  Determines the number of subvectors into which to break the vector. Subvectors are encoded independently of each other. This vector dimension must be divisible by `m`. Maximum value is 1,024.
```

> `code_size` | false | 8 | false | Determines the number of bits into which to encode a subvector. Maximum value is 8. For IVF, this value must be less than or equal to 8. For HNSW, this value can only be 8.

Reviewer 2: Should IVF be defined?

#### SQ parameters

Parameter name | Required | Default | Updatable | Description
:--- | :--- | :-- | :--- | :---

> `type` | false | `fp16` | false |  The type of scalar quantization to be used to encode 32-bit float vectors into the corresponding type. As of OpenSearch 2.13, only the `fp16` encoder type is supported. For the `fp16` encoder, vector values must be in the [-65504.0, 65504.0] range. 

Reviewer: > For the `fp16` encoder, vector values must be in the [-65504.0, 65504.0] range.

By default  `fp16` encoder expects vector values to be in the [-65504.0, 65504.0] range.

Also lets add above as Note and probably bold/highlight

Author: ack

Reviewer 4: We normally don't format sentences as a note in the parameter table.

Author: got it. Shall we add a note about this inside faiss scalar quantization section ?

> `clip` | false | `false` | false | If `true`, any vector values that are out of the supported range for the specified vector type are rounded so they are in the range. If `false`, the request is rejected if any vector values are out of the supported range. Setting `clip` to `true` may decrease recall.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`clip` | false | `false` | false | If `true`, then any vector values outside of the supported range for the specified vector type are rounded so that they are inside the range. If `false`, then the request is rejected if any vector values are outside of the supported range. Setting `clip` to `true` may decrease recall.
```

> `clip` | false | `false` | false | If `true`, then any vector values outside of the supported range for the specified vector type are rounded so that they are inside the range. If `false`, then the request is rejected if any vector values are outside of the supported range. Setting `clip` to `true` may decrease recall.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`clip` | false | `false` | false | If `true`, then any vector values outside of the supported range for the specified vector type are rounded so that they are in the range. If `false`, then the request is rejected if any vector values are outside of the supported range. Setting `clip` to `true` may decrease recall.
```

#### SQ parameters

Parameter name | Required | Default | Updatable | Description
:--- | :--- | :-- | :--- | :---
`type` | false | `fp16` | false |  The type of scalar quantization to be used to encode 32-bit float vectors into the corresponding type. As of OpenSearch 2.13, only the `fp16` encoder type is supported. For the `fp16` encoder, vector values must be in the [-65504.0, 65504.0] range. 
`clip` | false | `false` | false | If `true`, any vector values that are out of the supported range for the specified vector type are rounded so they are in the range. If `false`, the request is rejected if any vector values are out of the supported range. Setting `clip` to `true` may decrease recall.

For more information and examples, see [Using Faiss scalar quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#using-faiss-scalar-quantization).

#### Examples

The following example uses the `ivf` method  without specifying an encoder (by default, OpenSearch uses the `flat` encoder):

```json

> {

Author: I think we can revert all these examples as well. Just providing the method definition should be sufficient

    "m": 8
  }
}
```

The following example uses the `ivf` method with a `sq` encoder of type `fp16`:

```json
"method": {
  "name":"ivf",
  "engine":"faiss",
  "space_type": "l2",
  "parameters":{
    "encoder": {
      "name": "sq",
      "parameters": {
        "type": "fp16",
        "clip": false
      }
    },
    "nprobes": 2
  }
 }
```

#### PQ parameters

Parameter name | Required | Default | Updatable | Description
:--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`m` | false | 1 | false |  Determines the number of subvectors into which to break the vector. Subvectors are encoded independently of each other. This dimension of the vector must be divisible by `m`. Maximum value is 1,024.
`code_size` | false | 8 | false | Determines the number of bits into which to encode a subvector. Maximum value is 8. For IVF, this value must be less than or equal to 8. For HNSW, this value can only be 8.

#### SQ parameters

Parameter name | Required | Default | Updatable | Description
:--- | :--- | :-- | :--- | :---
`type` | false | fp16 | false |  Determines the type of scalar quantization to be used to encode the 32 bit float vectors into the corresponding type. By default, it is `fp16`.

> `clip` | false | false | false | When set to `true`, clips the vectors that are outside of the range to bring them into the range.

Reviewer 5: What happens when it is false? We need to call out explicitly it will reject

Author: updated

> `clip` | false | false | false | When set to `true`, clips the vectors that are outside of the range to bring them into the range. If it is `false` and any vector element is out of range, then it rejects the request and throws an exception. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`clip` | `false` | `false` | `false` | When set to `true`, clips any out of range vectors to bring them into the range. If `clip` is `false` and any vector element is out of range, the request throws an exception. 
```

If memory is a concern, consider adding a PQ encoder to your HNSW or IVF index. Because PQ is a lossy encoding, query quality will drop.

> If you want to reduce the memory requirements by a factor of 2 (with very minimal loss of search quality) or by a factor of 4 (with a significant drop in search quality), consider vector quantization. To learn more about vector quantization options, see [k-NN vector quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/). 

Reviewer: You can reduce the memory footprint by factor of 2 by using fp_16 encoder technique(provide link?) with minimal loss in search quality. If your vector dimensions  fit in the byte range [-128, 128] we recommend using byte quantizer(provide link?) to cut down memory footprint by factor of 4.

Author: ack

Reviewer 4: The byte range is [-128, 127], correct?

Author: yes, byte range is [-128 to 127]

> You can reduce the memory footprint by factor of 2 by using the [`fp_16` encoder]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#faiss-scalar-quantization) with a minimal loss in search quality. If your vector dimensions are within the [-128, 127] byte range, we recommend using the [byte quantizer]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#lucene-byte-vector) in order to reduce memory footprint by factor of 4. To learn more about vector quantization options, see [k-NN vector quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can reduce the memory footprint by a factor of 2, with a minimal loss in search quality, by using the [`fp_16` encoder]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#faiss-scalar-quantization). If your vector dimensions are within the [-128, 127] byte range, we recommend using the [byte quantizer]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#lucene-byte-vector) in order to reduce the memory footprint by a factor of 4. To learn more about vector quantization options, see [k-NN vector quantization]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/). 
```

Having a replica doubles the total number of vectors.
{: .note }

> For memory estimation when using vector quantization, see the [vector quantization documentation]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#memory-estimation).

Reviewer 2: "For information about using memory estimation with vector quantization"?

> For memory estimation when using vector quantization, see the [vector quantization documentation]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#memory-estimation).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For information about using memory estimation with vector quantization, see the [vector quantization documentation]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/#memory-estimation).
```
